---
published: false
layout: post
thumbnail: 'http://placehold.it/100x100'
---

So, there’s this thing called Blazewater.
It’s a piece of software to which developers, product managers and planners have devoted thousands of hours over the past couple of years. It’s going to transform the process of building accurate, actionable financial plans from hours of tinkering in Excel to the push of a button on a slick, Web-based interface. It’s going to help us bring on new clients while ensuring those with whom we now work have up-to-date, relevant advice as they pursue financial progress.
But how does it work? Why did it recommend that level of retirement savings, and in that type of account? Why does my client’s flex spending number look different now than it did before? How does it factor in my clients’ bonus? These are a few of the many questions that conscientious planners will raise as they begin using a tool that, although quick and efficient, offers less in the way of immediate insight as to its calculations.
That’s where this documentation comes in: it’s an evolving story that seeks to explain the details of Blazewater’s algorithm: that is, how and why it produces the calculations it does. It’s an unwieldy set of documents that brings you right into the weeds of the math behind the 50,000 lines of code that comprise Blazewater.
Before diving in, let’s talk about the process through which this documentation emerged, which will lead to an explanation of its purpose, its scope, and the ways in which it will change in the months and years to come.
 
*
Developers like Kyle Billemeyer and Nancy Zheng wrote Blazewater in a programming language called Java. It’s a powerful tool whose code is precise but inscrutable to a non-developer. In an effort to ensure Blazewater knowledge lives in a place other than their own minds, they led the effort to write out the “tech specs,” i.e. outlines that explain the code, line-by-line.

Other developers, like Willem van Daalen, Steven Kolln, Joshua Marshall and Taher Abouzeid, who have joined the Blazewater algorithm team more recently, wrote tech specs for more of the code’s sections under Kyle’s and Nancy’s guidance. The tech specs, which you can see here, are far more accessible than the code itself, but as their name implies, are steeped in technical language that’s often hard to translate into financial planning methods and practices.
 
That’s where a team of Planners, including Rachel Sanborn, Lauren yoder and I came in: we reviewed the tech specs and did our best to translate them into narratives that offer Planners and those responsible for training them a sense of the decisions Blazewater makes and why it makes them. Of course, we detained Tom Gilmourfor long periods of time to so he could help us bridge the gap between the tech specs and the writing that would turn into the documentation you’re reading.
In the near future, this documentation will live on a tool like Confluence, which offers easy collaboration and a record of changes. For now, it’s a Word document on which I’ve enabled “track changes.” In the coming weeks, we’ll devise a system by which developers revise the tech specs along with changes in the code, and an editor of the documentation makes the related changes in the next version of what you’re reading now.
*
While we believe this writing will be helpful, some caveats are in order. This writing covers the work of the Blazewater algorithm, meaning it focuses more tightly on the math and logic behind the software than on aspects like the Fact Set or the user interface. 
This documentation is long. It covers a wide array of topics, and it drives into the weeds with regard to some pretty arcane topics. In explaining ourselves, I’d like to highlight a quote from the U.S. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.: “I wouldn’t give a fig for the simplicity on this side of complexity, but I would give my life for the simplicity on the other side of complexity.” As of this writing, in October 2015, we’re firmly in the muck of complexity, desperately seeking the light of at the other side.
It would have been tempting to settle in this documentation for superficial sets of bullet points or quick explanations. Despite the appeal of concision, though, shorter pieces of writing are often less effective than longer ones. That’s especially true if they fail to live up to the complexity of their subjects. We don’t expect the average Planner to read every page of this documentation. Rather, it should serve as a searchable reference that offers insight as to how Blazewater makes its calculations, and it will, we hope, offer helpful context for training.
To the extent possible, we hope you enjoy this writing; if you have questions about what it covers or thoughts as to how we can make it more streamlined or consumable, please feel to let me know.
~ Joe Shure, October 2015

Back to Table of Contents
Incomes 
Tech Specs by Steven Kolln / Documentation by Joe Shure
Normal, Taxable Income
 
In a perfect world, every client would supply impeccable data on every aspect of his or her pay-stub. In the real world, Blazewater extrapolates the client’s income situation from the information it receives.
For example, it’s common for a client to report his gross income and take-home pay but tell us nothing about how much of the difference goes to, say, taxes, insurance premiums or other expenses. Blazewater assumes the difference is comprised entirely of taxes unless contributions to employer-sponsored retirement accounts enter the picture: these savings form the difference between “after-tax” and “take-home” pay in Blazewater’s view.
If employer-retirement savings are absent, Blazewater views “after-tax” and “take-home” pay as identical values.
*
When Blazewater receives vague information as to the frequency of a given income, it makes an assumption along the lines that, say, a client with an after-tax income of $60,000 who receives paychecks bi-monthly receives $2,500 per paycheck.
 
*
 
There are a couple of crucial data points with which even the most diligent clients could never provide us: the dates on which their incomes will change and by how much.
For the sake of realistic projections, Blazewater assumes all “active” income – that is, earned income as opposed to investment proceeds or that received as rent - increases at a 3% inflation rate every year. This trend continues until the client retires, at which point, we expect, active income ceases. We project passive income like investment proceeds and rental income continue through the client's lifetime.
"Active" income includes only earned income; as such, it's the income we use when assessing a person's ability to contribute to various retirement accounts and the amounts they can contribute. For example, we would decline to recommend a client saves into an IRA if he or she lacks "active" - or, earned - income. 
*
If a Planner marks a given income stream “taxable” but lacks information on how much of it is withheld, Blazewater will calculate the client’s effective tax rate and apply it to this income stream. Maximum withholding for taxes on income is 30% .” Just to be clear, as this question arose when we were writing the documentation, we calculate the client's actual, effective tax rate rather than just using the closest marginal rate. 
 The “retirement_taxation” audit file displays a client’s effective tax rate. The rate is the sum of the client’s effective federal rate, a five-percent state tax “buffer,” and the 7.65% FICA rate.
 *
Blazewater distinguishes between a client’s “main” income and his or her “other” income:
For the main income stream, we assume the tax liability the client supplies (i.e., the difference between gross income and take-home pay) is correct. If they supply no tax liability, we’ll calculate their effective tax rate using a method explained below, and we’ll urge them to save that much in escrow throughout the year.
Estimating the tax liability on the client’s main income source means applying the tax liability their marginal tax rate would imply (and we assume these brackets increase with inflation, by 3% each year). In addition, we apply a “state tax buffer” of 5%, as well as  FICA taxes totaling 7.65% of gross income.
We have yet to build a way to “cap” Social Security taxes: that is, instead of projecting that only the client’s first $118,500 of income is subject to Social Security tax (which is the case in real life as of 2015), we assume that all the client’s earned income is subject to Social Security tax. On that note, we do not apply the Medicare surtax rate to even to incomes that would, in reality, trigger this tax.
*
The way we apply total taxes to the client’s income varies based on her filing status: if she files jointly with her spouse, we apply the tax liability (calculated based on the couple’s joint bracket) to the couple’s combined income. Otherwise, we apply the liability to an individual’s income. We would base their liability on their individual bracket, whether single or head-of-household.
We mentioned urging clients to save in escrow for the taxes we expect they’ll owe. Specifically, we urge them to save a portion of each income stream on a pro-rata basis. Picture a household with two income streams – of $40,000 and $60,000 – and a $30,000 tax liability: we’d urge them to save in escrow $12,000 of the first income and $18,000 of the second: these amounts reflect each income’s share of the total income.
*
What about windfalls? Blazewater segments them out, taxing them if applicable, and applying the after-tax amount toward goals. 
 
 
*
*
Clients who are paid bi-weekly – i.e., they receive 26 paychecks per year – have “extra” paychecks in certain months and therefore present a unique situation. Blazewater handles it by basing a given month’s budget on the income from two paychecks. It also predicts the months in which “third” paychecks will arrive, automatically allocating those additional dollars to goals For our purposes, those “extra” paychecks are considered windfalls, which you can read more about here.
It’s important that Planners entering in this type of income mark as the “start” date a date on which a paycheck arrived. This can be the date of the most recent paycheck or, if the client will start the job in the near future, the date of the first one, even if it will arrive after the Plan begins. As long as Blazewater has a correct “start” date to this income stream, it can predict when “third” paychecks will arrive and will allocate these extra dollars accordingly.
When entering data into the Incomes section of the Fact Set, it’s tempting to enter the beginning and end dates of a pay-check as the start- and end-dates of a given income stream (see screen-cap below). That’s actually the wrong way to do it. The “end”ate in this portion refers to the income stream itself. So, if a Planner enters the “end” date as the final date of the pay period, Blazewater will assume this income stream ceased on that date.
To re-cap: Blazewater needs “start” dates for incomes. If you’re entering a bi-weekly income stream, it’s important that the “start” date corresponds the date on which a paycheck arrives. It doesn’t have to be the most recent paycheck, just any paycheck from the past or near future.
Income streams that arrive with a frequency other than bi-weekly (i.e. monthly or bi-monthly) need start-dates, too, but those dates don’t have to correspond with a paycheck. A Planner can, for these incomes, enter any date on or before the date on which the Plan begins.
For all income types, entering an “end” date stops the income. So, for incomes from jobs that the client expects to continue indefinitely, avoid entering “end” dates.  For incomes the client knows will cease, such as a temporary project or one-time windfall, enter “end” dates. If you indicate that a windfall will come within 12 months of the Plan Start, Blazewater will consider it as arriving in the first "year" of the Plan. The windfall will then flow into calculations about gross income for areas like retirement savings calculations. To avoid this, make sure the date of a windfall the client expects in the following calendar year after the 12th month of the Plan. 
For example, if the Plan begins in March of 2016, and a client expects a bonus in January of 2017, enter it as March 2017 or later.
